Roadmap for 2024 and a retrospective for 2023 (#3564)
carbon-language/carbon-lang: docs/project/roadmap.md

    -   [Potential goals _beyond_ 2027: ship 1.0 language & organization](#potential-goals-beyond-2027-ship-10-language--organization)

<!-- tocstop -->

## Objective for 2024: a working toolchain that supports C++ interop

Our focus for 2024 will be to get the Carbon toolchain working, including C++
interop. We see three key criteria:

-   Building realistic Carbon code for interesting interop with C++.
-   Building realistic C++ code for interesting interop with Carbon.
-   The interop itself to allow a single program mixing the two languages.

This will both allow folks to explore Carbon using a more traditional and
realistic compiler model, and allow that exploratory Carbon to lean on C++ for
libraries and other functionality that doesn't exist in Carbon yet. It will also
demonstrate how the interop will work in practice.

This objective and focus are oriented around the toolchain and implementation of
Carbon. We still expect some work on language design, but for its priority to be
driven largely as a function of being in the critical path of some aspect of our
implementation work.

> ## Key results in 2024

Reviewer: Diagnostic readability has been a significant focus of development, and leads have encouraged working on it, but it's not mentioned either here or in milestones.md. It's significant effort and I don't think it's necessary for other features. Should diagnostic readability be in at least one of these two docs?

Author: I'm not sure exactly what things you're thinking of here, so sorry if this is too vague of an answer...

But generally, I think the milestones document is the better place to try to cover the set of things needed for 0.1. I suspect some level of diagnostic quality is going to be needed for 0.1, but there are also probably some levels of investment into diagnostics not needed. If we have good ways of calling out the things that would be needed, we should, but I've not thought deeply about how to identify that.

Separately, there are times where we want to build our infrastructure so that it *can* support the level of diagnostic quality we expect to want long-term. That's a tricky thing to defer even though we may not be trying to completely leverage it within the 0.1 timeframe. Sometimes, we can. But other times, we can't and I suspect we should build "the right" infrastructure from the start. Again, if anywhere, I would expect to cover this in the milestones document, but not sure exactly how. Happy for suggestions on that front though.

Reviewer: Per discussion, I think we concluded that we probably won't be investing much into more advanced diagnostics next year (and possibly for 0.1). So not really needing changes.

> ### Carbon's toolchain implements the language enough to support interop with C++

Reviewer: This goal seems to overlap with "### Carbon's has a design and toolchain implementation of basic C++ interop". FWIW, the latter list seems more focused on features to support interop, whereas this list seems more broad language features not directly associated with interop; for example, it's not clear to me how operator overloading would fit in with interop; are you setting a goal for cross-language operator overloading?

Author: No, this is about implementing enough of the Carbon language design that we can write useful code on the Carbon side of the interop. The goal below is the only one talking about actual interop features. Happy for suggestions to clarify the text?

As a concrete example, all I mean by "operator" stuff below is that we likely need things like `+` to work, and work for more than one type in Carbon code. Otherwise we won't really be able to write interesting code on the Carbon side of interop.

Reviewer: Maybe something like "Carbon's toolchain supports interesting native code" or "supports generic code" (since that's the focus)?

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Carbon's toolchain implements the pure-Carbon prerequisites for C++ interop
```

Author: I think this gets a bit *too* precise...

I've tried a hybrid of Jon's suggestion and the wording from the objective with a clarifying paragraph. What do folks think?

Reviewer: Thanks, looks good. (although... bouncing in my head what the "realistic" standard is)

Author: Yeah, the realistic is a bit of a judgement call. But I think it's OK to not have that level of precision. Mostly, I don't think we're going to be that confused about the direction or priorities because of different ideas of what's realistic here.

Some example language features that we think are key to success here but far
from an exhaustive list:

-   Imports
-   Operator overloading and dispatch for expressions
-   Generic types and functions

> -   Templates (at least enough for interop)

Reviewer: To be sure, if we don't implement any interop that would need template support this year, does that mean no template support?

Note though, template support might have substantial cost, even minimal template support.

Author: Sure, I would prioritize template support here pretty specifically at the same level as template support in interop. If we aren't getting towards wanting interop to support that, then it we also probably aren't going to need it on the Carbon side.

### Carbon's toolchain can build C++ code

> We need the toolchain to be able to build C++ code as-if it were Clang in order

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We need the toolchain to be able to build C++ code as if it were Clang in order
```

to build the C++ code that Carbon is interoperating with. This isn't about
building anything new or novel, but about packaging and exposing Clang for this
purpose.

### Carbon's toolchain works with existing, simple C++ build systems

We should be able to drop Carbon's toolchain into at least simple `Makefile` or
CMake build systems as a replacement for the C++ toolchain and provide a Carbon
toolchain. This doesn't include supporting everything or even moderately complex

> builds, only the simplest of builds using these build systems need to work at

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
builds; only the simplest of builds using these build systems need to work at
```
(comma splice)

first.

> ### Carbon's has a design and toolchain implementation of basic C++ interop

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Carbon has a design and toolchain implementation of basic C++ interop
```

Our end goal is to compile a minimal but non-trivial example of bi-directionally
mixing C++ and Carbon code such as our main example and run it successfully.
However, completing everything involved in this example isn't expected to be
realistic by the end of the year. We expect to work towards this example and in
rough priority order across the following interop features and all the Carbon
features they depend on:

-   Calling C++ functions from Carbon.
-   Importing concrete C++ types as Carbon types.
-   (stretch) Using Carbon generics with a C++ type in Carbon.
-   (stretch) Calling Carbon functions from C++.
-   (stretch) Importing concrete Carbon types into C++.

### Give talks at 2-3 conferences covering 3-4 different Carbon topics

We want to continue to engage with the external C++ community as the Carbon

> toolchain becomes a more real and working toolchain. We specifically want to

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
toolchain becomes a more real and complete toolchain. We specifically want to
```

> share as interop becomes something people can experiment with and explore.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
share when interop becomes something people can experiment with and explore.
```
maybe?

## Beyond 2024

Longer term goals are hard to pin down and always subject to change, but we want
to give an idea of what kinds of things are expected at a high level further out
in order to illustrate how the goals and priorities we have in 2024 feed into
subsequent years.

> ### Potential 2025 goals: ship a working 0.1 language for evaluation

Reviewer: Given the mention of 0.1 is being removed from the roadmap, should a link to the milestones doc be added?

Author: Yeah, good idea. Done.

## Key results in 2024

### Carbon's toolchain implements enough of the language to build realistic code

This goal is not necessarily about complete support for the entire language
design, but rather enough of it to support building the realistic and
interesting Carbon code that interoperates with C++. This does include
prerequisites like the prelude.

Some example language features that we think are key to success here but far
from an exhaustive list:

> -   Imports

Reviewer: ```suggestion
interesting Carbon code that interoperates with C++.

Some example language features that we think are key to success here but far
from an exhaustive list:

-   Imports and prelude
```

Author: Sure -- had to manually apply this as Github didn't give me a button and added a couple of words.

toolchain becomes a more real and complete toolchain. We specifically want to
share when interop becomes something people can experiment with and explore.

### Start building our initial tutorial and introductory material

Because of the nature of Carbon's experiment, the tutorial and introductory
material won't be focused on typical teaching of the language to general
developers. Instead, it will be focused on enabling C++ developers to start
evaluating specific aspects of Carbon for interoperating with existing C++
codebases.

We only expect to _start_ building this material in 2024. We want to learn about

> any critical gaps are for folks to start evaluating C++ interop and how best to
> close them going into 2025.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
what any critical gaps are for folks to start evaluating C++ interop and how best
to close them going into 2025.
```
